This is 99percentinvisible. I'm Roman Mars. The most popular sport in the world has been relatively slow to catch on here in the United States. There's this episode of The Simpsons that I think captures the disdain with which some Americans regard the rest of humanity favorite game. It starts with a family watching TV. Cavalletto Soccer Association is Kevin in Springfield. It's all here. Hey Dad, how come you never taking us to see a soccer game has decided to go to the game and the stands are packed? The fans enthusiasm quickly evaporates as the game gets going. Back to the center. Better hold it. How old is it? Holds it do something. I think it's fair to say that Homer and Krusty the Clown are echoing a common complaint about soccer. But you here in the United States a lot that it's not exciting enough. That's producer Fitzgerald. They don't score enough points Clemente's narrow-minded touchdown lovers. I completely disagree with this perspective. But even I have to admit that soccer can be a low-scoring affair professional teams routinely wendgames want nothing or worse yet battle for 90 minutes and settle for a 0-0 draw but whatever your feelings about the relative excitement of the beautiful game soccer was undoubtedly more boring 30 years ago. The world was in general agreement that the game is too slow and they need to be made more Dynamic. This is a soccer writer or football writer Adam hurry and Adam set the main culprit slowing the game down with the goalkeeper very useful in controlling the pace of a game teams would score a goal and then they would do anything they could just Full-time and protect the lead in the easiest way to do that was just to pass the ball to the goalkeeper who back then could just pick the ball up and run a few seconds off the clock before throwing it back into play and you could do this as many times as you wanted. It kind of results of the real Soho most comic book scenarios. What they would kick the ball back to go keep it from the halfway line from free-kicks that I had in your position Hall just because I knew that would waste precious seconds. The opposition seems simply couldn't have to pull people finally got fed up with this uninspiring tactic during the 1990 World Cup in Italy going to paint the World Cup of 1990s as a wonderful tournament at the time. It was regarded as kind of the power going to Seneca football. Lots of us are in games lots of passing the ball back to the time. I think there was one story about a game Italia 90 between Egypt and Republic of Ireland where someone totaled up the amount of time that I was talking to Pat Bonner had the ball in his hand. I'm headed up to six minutes of the words fan spent about 7% of the game watching the goalkeeper. Just hold ball people go to watch football with one of the red things. He did get right in his in his time and holding the volume 110 something had to be done. And so in 1992 the International Football Association board the committee in charge of determining the rules of soccer made a minor change the laws of the game from That season forward in every League throughout the world to come player intentionally. Kick the ball back to the goalkeeper. The goalkeeper could no longer use their hands. So any deliberate pause back to the goalkeeper from any place on the pitch could not be picked up FIFA put out a press release about the new rule where they came down to the hard on the goalkeepers. It was above the law and it was very strong about this. They said the goalkeeper has a very rare privilege in football the use of his hands but it is a privilege that should not be abused time-wasting is one of the worst forms of unsporting behavior because it's a fair chance of using the full of the time we use their skills to win the game might seem like a pretty little tweak to the rules of soccer. But over time it would completely transform the game and ways that FIFA could never have envisioned this little rule change would become one of the most consequential and a history of the sport enforce nearly every player on the field to adapt but in the short-term the rule change would cause an existential crisis for one player in particular the goalkeeper. The goalkeeper has always been a unique specialist position like a field goal kicker in American football or a coxon in rowing. They even wear a different colored shirt from their teammates as if to signify. I am not like the rest of you the most obvious difference is that they're allowed to do something that no one else in the field can touch the ball with their hands goalkeepers have this strange superpower, which they use to Bruin. Everyone else is fun soccer the most popular sport in the world and what most people love about it is the goals and it's actually our ambition to prevent goals from happening. So we're sort of trying to disappoint the entire world. This is Justin Brian a former professional fun Ruiner who is currently the goalkeeping coach for the North Carolina State women's soccer team Ryan is from the United States, but he play professionally in England in the 80s and 90s for a really small club called borehamwood FC 50 lb a week plus room and board and so I buy the slim Margins, I made a living but but I did Justin was this kid from Florida living out of a bed-and-breakfast trying to follow his dreams, but it wasn't always easy. The fields were in bad shape at work sometimes hostile and the silent play in England at the time wasn't very sophisticated games. We just take me the long balls forward and hope that their big bruising Striker would make something happen. You know, I had two very quickly get used to balls being played in the box and three or four great big bald headed tattooed guys flying in trying to get to run me over essentially the goalkeepers job to go grab that ball. No matter what? Yeah, it's actually counter to several million years of human evolution throwing ourselves hurling themselves in front of a ball that's moving at a high rate of speed. Some people say you have to be crazy to be a goalkeeper. Justin doesn't love that word. But he says that goalkeepers are just wired a little bit differently than everybody else if he spots a soccer team at the airport. We can recognize the goalkeeper right away that it's a different personality type. It's a different mindset a different mentality. They carry themselves differently. They express themselves differently in the signs of a goalkeeper. I don't know there's there's all goalkeepers tend to have kind of a knowing smirk. That's that's the best way I put it and it's almost like they're saying yeah, I know I know what you think but I still like to do this I grew up playing soccer and I never wanted to be the goalkeeper in part because it felt like such a thankless job when goalies do everything right. They get take it for granted. But if they make one mistake everyone notices we can make out of fools of ourselves. We can make just the most horrific mistakes that lose games and it's very evident to everybody watching when that happens. But what happened to the goalkeeper, but I think that's every goalkeepers nightmare where you have nothing to do the whole game and then the other team gets one chance and it squirms right under your hands into the goal. You lose by that called. coma excellent goalkeeper That's a recipe for sleepless night or two. For that reason the goalkeeper developed a reputation as kind of a lonely Outsider French existentialist. Philosopher. Albert. Camus was a goalkeeper if that tells you anything, you know, obviously been around goalkeepers now is my profession for for a quarter-century and there are a lot of individualist iconoclasts loners. Whatever you want to call them. We are kind of alone tasked with keeping bazinet with our hands for Justin Bryant's whole life that have been his one job to keep the ball out of the net with his hands that is until 1992. I didn't hear about it until it actually did happen. Like it just I think anecdotally somebody mentioned I was starting next season. You can't pick up a back pass and I just couldn't I couldn't believe it because they were an awful lot of goalkeepers that weren't suited for it at all goalkeepers in England were trained in how to block shots catch crosses and fight for loose balls all things you most Do with your hands a training session in the old days of goalkeeper session in the 1980s wouldn't involve playing the ball with your feet at all at no point. But now if someone on their own team past them the ball the goalkeeper would be stripped of their superpowers. They would need to use their feet just like everybody else and that turned out to be a bit of a problem because a lot of them just didn't know how 1992 with a big year for English soccer. It was the start of a brand-new highly commercialize League that would go on to become the most lucrative in the world the English Premier League. There were big money sponsorships in a new TV deal. The whole country was watching soccer. But that first weekend of games in this critical season, we're pretty sloppy. We had a weekend full of goalkeepers making horrendous errors because they just didn't know what to do. That's Adam hurry against goalkeeper in a blind panic that the boy would be kicked back to them as it used to be because that's Defenders had a habit of doing that but then I suppose at that site that they just said she Tara over the first few months it was as if all the goalkeepers in England were working together to collaboratively produced One Long blooper reel. They were slips and falls and does our own goals. There was a particularly comical episode involving the goalkeeper for Sheffield United a man named Simon Tracy. Calamity point-by-point because it really does some of the immediate effects of the back pass low as possible back very simple policy could have dealt with it quite easily. But now the ball was at his feet a Striker from the other team started charging at Tracy fast knowing full well that he probably didn't have great Foot Skills and Tracy clearly panic Denis try to do lips get to get a wife in this when they attacked a running start and ended up running sideways towards the side of the pitch. What's the temperature? Just thought about it went from Comedy to Forest because the other team just needed to do a throw-in and they could shoot on an empty net since Tracy was so far out of position. And so Tracy tried to stop the ball boy from giving the ball to the other team. He ended up kind of wrestling the bull from this small child. President tackle the player on the other team to prevent him from throwing it in he was given a red card and kicked out of the game. So we did about maybe 15 seconds the whole drastic effects of the back glass door pin summed up don't keep it receiving a pause not knowing what to do trying to be clever and ending up in is coming Calamity Rego Center of pictures because he just didn't know what to do more often though. When someone passed the ball back to the goalkeeper and keep it would just kick it away as far as he could sometimes be at the field to put off in the ball would end up out of bounds sometimes 15 rows up in the stadium. Sometimes completely out of the stadium so wasn't wasn't a very aesthetically pleasing development at first so did the first reaction was was how is this improved? I'll gain weight. If anything it's it's it's less enjoyable to watch because now the world soccer magazine wants to save all back to his campaign everything that is a fan of the game used. This is not you know, the greatest thing to look at and I think they're going to regret it and I even wondered in the early days if they would change it back another goalkeeper from that. Craig Forrest remember is the rule change causing friction between goalkeepers in Defenders Forest play for a Premier League team called it's which town and he says that that first season is Defenders would forget about the rule change and passing the ball and he's really dangerous situations. They would pass the ball back to you forgetting when they real came in that you could couldn't pick it up. Sometimes it was slipped their mind and they would lose focus and Posh you one. I cannot realize that I can't pick it up and then you're under too much pressure. He remembers One Moment in particular where a teammate with the hard pass right at his chest and he's yelling at me. Why don't I just pick it up the two goalkeepers that I spoke to you for the story were the lucky ones. They had decent Foot Skills and so over time they were able to adjust their oil change, but that wasn't the case for every goalkeeper and if anybody wasn't at all comfortable while with playing with your feet you got found out really quickly and you could be good at everything else. But if you're not good at playing with your feet or striking a ball First time in dealing with that you be out of the game and heartbeat in a lot of guys. It did Kill the game for them as well over the course of this new reality is a tragic elements this because there are hundreds of football to do simply of no use for my straight away. Suddenly. They were forced to do things that they should be one train for a whole generation of goalkeepers who have been brought up to to to rely on their hands only. Near ended kind of redundant or at it's almost like it's almost like jobs lost to automation or something like that but slower came in and wreaked havoc with their entire existence because they think it's almost obsolete. And you got a few of these guys like the goalkeeper was already this isolated lonely player, then just pull the rug out from under them with his rule change and tell them will now you need to have this whole new set of skills that you were trained for. But you know overtime the rule really became quite successful. I mean for 1 it completely did away with time-wasting which was its initial purpose and then after a few rough years goalkeepers really started developing the necessary Foot Skills. Yes. So then what happened is we change the way we train goalkeepers. So, you know, it didn't take long for coaches realize that's what we've got to prepare goalkeepers for this demand. Justin Bryant says, he had a goalkeeping coach at borehamwood who really made a point of this once the new law came into play. He started adding an element of playing the ball with your feet to every session almost every activity every drill. So we just started adding this kind of thing training everyone. Did it took a while but everyone started incorporating it and then the goal Keepers got better. Was it fun to suddenly have this new challenge? It was it was fun because you know, I like the feeling of being a more complete player. I I think we took it made us feel better about being goalkeepers because now we weren't just these weirdos who stood back there in and swatted the ball with our hands. We were soccer players. But the goalkeepers weren't the only ones who had to adjust the rule for the perspective of the Defenders the game changed a lot to before it when they got into a sticky situation. They can just pass the ball back to the goalkeeper who would take it up and now they didn't have this is Skype free that didn't have this kind of Fail-Safe. So they had today had to cut a Vevo very quickly as well and is defenders in goalkeepers adjusted to this Rule and got more skilled with their feet it completely change the way the game was played instead of just booting long balls forward team started focusing on keeping control of the ball with skillful passing became imperative. If you have the ball, the other team couldn't school that was pretty much the sauce here and that starts in the back if you can have a goalkeeper who's fully capable of joining him in the plate and he becomes an extra player than what you may have had 20 years previously. So it became an opportunity rather than than the Restriction Adam her is at the rule change even made players more physically fit because before whenever anyone Cast of Back to the goalkeeper be out till players have his moment to catch their breath. Now, there's no let-up. The action is non-stop the average Outfield player today runs out the seven miles in a single match now, they're all like Olympic decathlete sterile built light middleweight boxers. I think what we have now is a completely different sport. It's it's quicker. It's more Dynamic Plaza to be fitter to become so quick and so spectacular again is a direct result of the back possible is to me and underrated moment in football history. Everyone that I talk to for this story brought up the same player the goalkeeper of poop really represents. Just how far the game has come since this rule change back in 1992. His name is Edison, and he's this incredibly athletic Brazilian got a neck tattoo with side of his neck and Anderson is a very good goalkeeper in the traditional sense. He's a big guy with really strong hands is very agile good at blocking shots. But Edison has spellbinding Foot Skills. He's incredible with the English have one of the best in the world a man named Pep Guardiola and Guardiola started using Edison in a way that basically no goalkeeper have been used before he starts to Manchester City and he will hit 50 or they can hit the ball 5 yards some everything. He does with the boys with a purpose. He he's treated as part of the team and because of that in many ways that hurts and feels like a unique But at every level of soccer coaches are treating goalkeepers more like full members of a team today. Justin Bryant is the goalkeeping coach for the North Carolina State women's team. And he says that when they're recruiting they like to look for goalkeepers who can play the ball with their feet and possess the ball out of the back last year NC State had a star goalkeeper in Sydney Wooten she took us to to sweet sixteens. She had shutouts against schools like North Carolina Chapel Hill University of Virginia and was very short for goalie, but she was an incredible athlete with great leaping ability and very fast feet. But mainly she was such a good Striker the ball such a good passer and so the team developed a whole tactic of playing the ball out from the back base round bouton's what's kills woman. What's the best known for preventing the other team from scoring although she did that to she was a valuable part of the team's offensive strategy and so in a way this rule that initially seemed so on Fair to goalkeepers as ultimately made them a bit more like everyone else very existence and then over the course of the next 10 or 20 years back into the family. You still have individualistic iconoclastic loner personalities, but you know, we are in a very real sense more part of the team now. This year the International Football Association board made a few more tweaks to the rules when changing particular causing a few little problems for now on goal kicks don't have to leave The Penalty Box empty struggling to figure it out players are making mistakes just like they did back in 1992. It's hard to say right now if this will be an important rule change probably won't know for a couple decades. But if we've learned anything from the back pass law is that anytime you Tinker with rules of a sport and you never know what might happen from the forehead of FIFA the one who invented it and he has the facts to back him up after this. What do you need to find the right person for a job? Sometimes it feels like it can take forever. But zip recruiters goal is to make hiring quick and easy just take the CEO of Cafe Ultra Dylan miskewicz. He needed a new director of coffee. When does ZipRecruiter post the job and filled the role in just a few days? That's because it recruiters technology finds people with the right experience and invites them to apply to your job. You can try ZipRecruiter for free and discover how 4 out of 5 employers who post get a top candidate within the first day just go to ziprecruiter.com Nine-Nine that ziprecruiter.com ZipRecruiter the smartest way to hire. You have ideas. You want to share products you want to sell music you want people to hear whatever it is that gets you excited Squarespace can help spread the word Squarespace gives you the ability to customize your site to look and feel with just a few clicks and everything's optimized for mobile right out of the box. I build my own Squarespace site. It's Roman Mars. Com. It was simple no fuss and has functions like a newsletter sign-up and an embedded Twitter feed that I set up simply by dragging and dropping them. There is no reason to put off making your website any longer go to squarespace.com invisible for a free trial and when you're ready to launch use the offer code invisible to say 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. When you travel as much as I do you learn that the perfect hotel stay is all about balance. You want a hotel that strikes the perfect balance of the details you want and the service you need. This means Style with function and design with Comfort. This is AC hotels by Marriott. You may not notice all the thoughtful details, but you do always feel them AZ hotels member of Marriott bonvoy the perfectly precise Hotel visit AC hotels at AC - hotels.com to learn more. So I'm back in the studio with Emmett and he's got one more little detail to add to the story of the back pass law. Yeah, that one thing that we didn't get into in. The story proper was like who specifically came up with this idea for the backrest off right? I guess I could have assumed it was like this the collective wisdom of FIFA came up with the law since I'm bored room somewhere or collectively can't with this idea, but they're quick but that that is also what I assumed but as I was talking to Adam hurry, who is that the football the soccer journalist. He told me that he recently got a message from a journalist in Georgia who had some slightly more specific info Georgia the country map of Georgia the country. 811 listed that sent me a DM on Twitter saying you're going to enjoy this there's a guy here in the pressroom who claimed it invented the backpack slow. So yes, if it's this man's name was probably going to push you this but silk on Yash Billy. Yes, Philly Stadium telling you know anyone who would listen all the foreign journalist, who are they are covering the game, but she invented the backpack and he is holding this facts as proof. And what did the fox say? Well it was from FIFA does written in 1994, you know couple years after the law into effect and it was essentially a thank you fax. When was grateful to the realization that this new rule which is greatly contributed to the development of people worldwide. We appreciate the work of old pioneers who's our days help to improve our beloved Sport and you know, this was this was the first I or I think basically anyone who's written about this has ever really heard of this guy his his name is is very ready dimensional if ever in the history of this back off slow and despite it being one of those The most seismic events in football history special emote in football hero and I didn't get back to me some really sad about cuz I could to get his input and sadly. We still have not heard back from mr. Yash belly. And yeah, you know, like there's really nothing that's really been written about this guy and I don't you know, I'm I'm hoping that we are not spreading misinformation here, but you know, Adam sent me a copy of the fax and you know, it looks fairly legit to both of us as far as I'm concerned that his story is about to die. I got no reason to doubt in the facts looks legit to me and you know, this piece are there has to come from somewhere and no one else has ever been credited with it. So so yeah room and eat. Do you want to see the fact I can show it I can show it to you here to take a look at my laptop screen. Atlanta to scan of a wrinkled facts about the evolution of sports or if you tell a like the long story of the evolution of a game the heroes are, you know players and coaches to coaches to come up with cool ideas about different ways to play and adapt their tactics or their style of play, but rules are important to you know, the game is the game is contained by a set of rules, and those rules need to change at times to adapt to the way the game is being played in and maybe there's a heroic Jordan man who deserves more credit than he's gotten so far. So here's to you here's to you. Mr. Really important contribution to the evolution of soccer soccer forever. That's awesome. Cool. What a great detail. Thanks. Thank you. 99percentinvisible with Bruce's sweet by Emmett Fitzgerald mix into production by Sharif Youssef music by Sean real estate is the digital director. There was a team includes senior editor Delaney Hall Crystal Ruby Avery trufelman Vivien Leigh Sophia klatzker Joe Rosenberg and me Roman Mars also spoke with for the story is nubuck. The mixer is a great look at the evolution of soccer tactics since the back pass rule out of hurry also has a book called football cliches all about the language. We use to describe the beautiful game. If you want to read more about Justin Brian's professional career in England, he's got a memoir called small-time you find links to all of them on our website. We are project 91.7 kalw in San Francisco be produced on radio Row in beautiful, Downtown, Oakland, California. Connect Collective of the most Innovative shows in all the podcasting find mall at radiotopia. FM enjoy discussing about the show on Facebook in between me at Roman Mars in the show at 99 bi or run Instagram and read it too, but you can get the ball to us. We're open and 99 Pi. Org. radio Tempe TRX Hey beautiful nerds, you know, I love challenge points. If you don't know that turn your hymnals to episode number 156 of this very program where you can learn all about challenge coins and why I love them. The original 99 bi challenge coin is a much-coveted item that I always carry with me except when I'm carrying the handsome radiotopia challenge going now. We're going to offer a new radiotopia forever coin and I want you to pick the design. There are three options. I have my personal favorite I think one is going to win in a landslide but here's the thing. It's all up to you. What will the coin carrying supporters of the finest in the podcast beekeeping in that little fifth pocket of their genes you decide go to radiotopia. FM / vote to make your favorite coin and when we launch our annual fundraiser on November 25th will reveal the winter. When you donate you'll be able to have one of your own go to radiotopia. FM / vote right now. There are three choices. All you have to do is vote on your favorite and make sure you have your say radiotopia. FM boat